</head>
<body>
<h1>Object Oriented Programming</h1>

<p>It is a programming style that is intended to make thinking about programming closer to</p>

<p>thinking about the real world. CLASSES AND OBJECTS ; DEFINITIONS;</p>

<p>Class- a description/ definition of what something is, though not necessarily the particular</p>

<p>object-Its a well defined idea. Object- created based on the class. Could be multiple objects based on one class. Attributes and Behaviour-  -Attributes basically involves looking at something&rsquo;s characteristics.  -Behavious seeks to look at what it can do. Methods- Methods are called, ie those that are written outside the main body of the main method. Method Parameters;</p>

<p>- Basically data collected when running a method.</p>

<p>- Usually found within the parenthesis of the method().</p>

<p>- Other than taking data as parameters, it could also return data back to you.</p>

<p>- Return keyword is used to return a value, when calling a method, and you use &ldquo; void&rdquo; it</p>

<p>means that the function has no value to return, whereas when return is used, it means that</p>

<p>a value has to be returned by the function. CREATING CLASSES AND OBJECTS;</p>

<p>- Mostly use multiple classes in one code.</p>

<p>- You create an object for the method you want to use in another class..</p>

<p>ie, we have 2 classes; apples and tuna,</p>

<p>in tuna class, you have a method called &ldquo; SimpleMessage&rdquo;</p>

<p>and you want to use the method in tuna class within the apples class. HOW TO USE DIFFERENT CLASSES IN YOUR MAIN PROGRAM OR METHOD;</p>

<p>HOW TO USE OBJECTS; -Basic Syntax</p>

<p>TunaObject.SimpleMessage();</p>

<p>//Why we use a dot separator in the method name;</p>

<p>- As much as this class only has one method in this particular eg, don&amp;#39;t forget that it could</p>

<p>have as many methods as it needs. Hence, the dot separator, helps in identifying the</p>

<p>methods that you particularly require. Ie the object TunaObject the]at you created in the</p>

<p>apples class, that could allow you to use any method within the Tuna class, wants to</p>

<p>specifically run the SimpleMessage method.</p>

<p>As earlier stated, the attributes of a class are its characteristics.</p>

<p>Basic Syntax;</p>

<p>&ldquo;data type&rdquo; &ldquo; attribute name&rdquo; ;</p>

<p>HOW TO CREATE AN OBJECT;</p>

<p>Basic Syntax;</p>

<p>&ldquo;class name&rdquo; Object- name&rdquo; = &ldquo;new classname&rdquo;();</p>

<p>ie</p>

<p>aircraft Alexona = new aircraft();</p>

<p>//Class name is sort of a template for the type of object that we want to create. ACCESS MODIFIERS;</p>

<p>Are of three types, basically puts restrictions on how parts of your code can be accessed if</p>

<p>it could be accessed at all.</p>

<p>Public, Private, Protected and Default.</p>

<p>//Public- It can be accessed anywhere in the program so long as you have an instance of</p>

<p>this class to call it from.</p>

<p>//Private &ndash; It is not visible outside that particular class ie it cant be accessed other than</p>

<p>inside of this class</p>

<p>//Protected &ndash; it can only be accessed inside of this package and from sub classes of this</p>

<p>class.</p>

<p>- It becomes more clear when you cover inheritance.</p>

<p>//Default &ndash; it can only be accessed inside of this package.</p>

<p>Understood better after going through packages.</p>

<p>leave the access modifier out ie</p>

<p>void dosomething(){}</p>

<p>Rates in terms of access restricted;</p>

<p>1.Private</p>

<p>2.Default- since it can only be accessed inside this package</p>

<p>3.Protected- since it includes that particular package as well as subclassses</p>

<p>4.Public- since anything that has a references to an object.</p>

<p>//Good Programming Practice;</p>

<p>- Set all your variables within your classes to private,</p>

<p>this helps avoid confusing them or changing them and then forgetting their original values.</p>

<p>GET AND SET;</p>

<p>SO create a method that can relate to that private info . Used through</p>

<p>Get and Set method;</p>

<p>Diff between get and set method is;</p>

<p>gets helps us see hidden information</p>

<p>set helps us change private/ hidden information</p>

<p>set &ldquo;sets&rdquo; the variable to a new value.</p>

<p>Ie Basic Syntax;</p>

<p>Obj1.setx( 25);</p>

<p>get method is used to retrieve information that would otherwise not have been found since</p>

<p>it was of access type private.</p>

<p>CONSTRUCTORS;</p>

<p>Special methods that are invoked when an object is created and are used to initialize.</p>

<p>Basically involves naming a method, the same way as the class.</p>

<p>Constructor method name should be the same as the class name.</p>

<p>//it allows you, as soon as you create an object, to use that value and initialize it to</p>

<p>whatever you want</p>

<p>Basic Syntax;</p>

<p>public tuna (&ldquo; data type&rdquo; name){</p>

<p>}</p>

<p>ie</p>

<p>public tuna ( String boyname){</p>

<p>boyname = name;</p>

<p>} VALUE AND REFERENCE TYPES;</p>

<p>Value data types include; byte, short, int, long, float, double, boolean, char</p>

<p>reference data types include all other types</p>

<p>Value type- passing a copy of the calue</p>

<p>Reference type- passing a reference that stores the location in memory of the object.</p>

<p>Meaning, we are able to manipulate the object itself.</p>

<p>MATH METHODS;</p>

<p>System.out.printIn (Math.abs(x)); // gives you how much away from 0 that the figure is</p>

<p>System.out.printIn (Math.ceil(x)); //Rounds up the number ie 7.7 becomes 8.0</p>

<p>System.out.printIn (Math.floor(x)); //Rounds down the number ie 8.4 becomes 8.0</p>

<p>System.out.printIn (Math.max(x)); // can take two parameters, not confined to one</p>

<p>parameter.</p>

<p>System.out.printIn (Math.min(x)); //gives you the min of both parameters.</p>

<p>System.out.printIn (Math.power(x)); //first parameter is the figure then the 2 nd parameter</p>

<p>gives you the power to muliply by.</p>

<p>System.out.printIn (Math.sqrt(x)); //gives you the squarerooth of the figure.</p>

<p>OBJECTS;</p>

<p>When every class has the same value or functions</p>

<p>Doesnt change. And if it does change, it changes for every variable.</p>

<p>// normally put in caps in practice, but not really a requirement.</p>

<p>The 4 main concepts of OOP are;</p>

<p>encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism and abstraction.</p>

<p>ENCAPSULATION;</p>

<p>-Ensures that implementation details are not visible to users. Ie the variables in once class</p>

<p>will be hidden from other classes, accessible only through the methods of the current</p>

<p>class.</p>

<p>- Data hiding.</p>

<p>To achieve this, declare the class&amp;#39; variables as private and provide public setter and</p>

<p>getter methods to modify and view the variables&amp;#39; values.</p>

<p>INHERITANCE;</p>

<p>- it enables one class to acquire the properties( methods and variables) of another class.</p>

<p>- Info is placed in a more manageable, hieracical manner.</p>

<p>- Class inheriting the properties of another class is known as a subclass.</p>

<p>-Class whose properties are being inherited is the superclass</p>

<p>-To inherit from a class, use the &ldquo; extend &rdquo; keyword</p>

<p>-Methods you recreate in the subclasses will override the inherited methods from the</p>

<p>superclass.</p>

<p>- Only public methods can be inherited, thus, if you have a private method in the</p>

<p>superclass, the subclass cant inherit it, it cant be seen.</p>

<p>POLYMORPHISM;</p>

<p>It refers to the idea of having &ldquo;many forms&rdquo;.</p>

<p>Ie even though it inherits from another class, it gives you an opportunity to have alternate</p>

<p>verions.</p>

<p>Occurs when there is a hierachy of classes related to each other through inheritance.</p>

<p>Anything, that inherits from the superclass, can be assigned to the variable name.</p>

<p>Basically polymorphism is one method but with different implementations.</p>

<p>METHOD OVERRIDING;</p>

<p>As earlier noticed,</p>

<p>a subclass can define a behavior( method ) that&amp;#39;s specific to the subclass type,</p>

<p>meaning that a subclass can implement a parent class method based on its requirement.</p>

<p>Rules for Method Overriding:</p>

<p>- Should have the same return type and arguments</p>

<p>- The access level cannot be more restrictive than the overridden method&amp;#39;s access level</p>

<p>(Example: If the superclass method is declared public, the overriding method in the sub</p>

<p>class can be neither private or protected)</p>

<p>- A method declared final or static cannot be overridden</p>

<p>- If a method cannot be inherited, it cannot be overridden</p>

<p>- Constructors cannot be overridden</p>

<p>METHOD OVERLOADING;</p>

<p>Method with the same name but different arguments.</p>

<p>Also could be known as compile-time polymorphism.</p>

<p>Occurs when methods have the same name, but different parameters.</p>

<p>Helpful when you need the same method functionality for different types o fparameters.</p>

<p>N.B</p>

<p>An overloaded method must have a different argument list;</p>

<p>the parameters should differ in their type, number, or both.</p>

<p>ABSTRACT CLASSES;</p>

<p>It could be thought of as a class that represents a generalization and provides</p>

<p>functionality but is only intended to be extended and not instantiated.</p>

<p>Its entire purpose is to be inherited/ extended by other classes.</p>

<p>It lets us define a generalisation, that can then be shared amongst a group of</p>

<p>specialisation.</p>

<p>It provides the outside world with only essential info, in a process of representing essential</p>

<p>features without implementation details.</p>

<p>The concept of abstraction is that we focus on essential qualities, rather than the specific</p>

<p>characteristics of one particular example.</p>

<p>Abstract class- defined using the &ldquo; abstract &rdquo; keyword.</p>

<p>N.B -</p>

<p>objects of that type).</p>

<p>-If a class is declared abstract it cannot be instantiated (you cannot create</p>

<p>-- Any class that contains an abstract method should be defined as abstract.</p>

<p>However, to use an abstract class, you have to inherit it from another class.</p>

<p>XTERISTICS;</p>

<p>-May contain instances or static variables/ methods.</p>

<p>- May contain a constructor( though cannot be called directly)</p>

<p>- May contain abstract methods.( methods that have no implementation, as these methods</p>

<p>would be implemented in the subclass.)</p>

<p>UML=</p>

<p>INTERFACES;</p>

<p>An interface is a completely abstract class that contains only abstract methods.</p>

<p>Some specifications for interfaces:</p>

<p>- Defined using the interface keyword.</p>

<p>- May contain only static final variables.</p>

<p>- Cannot contain a constructor because interfaces cannot be instantiated.</p>

<p>- Interfaces can extend other interfaces.</p>

<p>- A class can implement any number of interfaces.</p>

<p>Interfaces have the following properties:</p>

<p>- An interface is implicitly abstract. You do not need to use the abstract keyword while</p>

<p>declaring an interface.</p>

<p>- Each method in an interface is also implicitly abstract, so the abstract keyword is not</p>

<p>needed.</p>

<p>- Methods in an interface are implicitly public.</p>

<p>N.B</p>

<p>A class can inherit from just one superclass but can implement multiple interfaces!</p>

<p>Use the implements keyword to use an interface with your class.</p>

<p>CASTING;</p>

<p>Type casting;</p>

<p>Assigning a value of one type to a variable of another type is known as Type Casting.</p>

<p>Upcasting</p>

<p>You can cast an instance of a subclass to its superclass.</p>

<p>EXCEPTIONS;</p>

<p>Its a problem that occurs during program execution.</p>

<p>They cause abnormal termination of the program.</p>

<p>Exception handling is a powerful mechanism that handles runtime errors to maintain</p>

<p>normal application flow.</p>

<p>An exception can occur for many different reasons. Some examples:</p>

<p>- A user has entered invalid data.</p>

<p>- A file that needs to be opened cannot be found.</p>

<p>- A network connection has been lost in the middle of communications.</p>

<p>- Insufficient memory and other issues related to physical resources.</p>

<p>Exception Handling</p>

<p>Exceptions can be caught using a combination of the try and catch keywords.</p>

<p>MULTIPLE EXCEPTIONS;</p>

<p>throw</p>

<p>The throw keyword allows you to manually generate exceptions from your methods.</p>

<p>The throw statement in the method would have to define the type of exception(s) the</p>

<p>method can throw, followed by the corresponding exception, along with a custom</p>

<p>message.</p>

<p>Various available exception types include;</p>

<p>1. IndexOutOfBoundsException</p>

<p>2. IllegalArgumentException</p>

<p>3. ArithmeticException</p>

<p>int div(int a, int b) throws ArithmeticException {</p>

<p>if(b == 0) {</p>

<p>throw new ArithmeticException(&amp;quot;Division by Zero&amp;quot;);</p>

<p>} else {</p>

<p>return a / b;</p>

<p>}</p>

<p>}</p>

<p>THREADS;</p>

<p>Java is a multi-threaded programming language</p>

<p>Which basically means that our program can make optimal use of available resources by</p>

<p>running two or more components concurrently, with each component handling a different</p>

<p>task.</p>

<p>You have the capability to sub-divide specific operations within a single app into individual</p>

<p>threads that all run in parrallel.</p>

<p>There are two ways to create a thread,</p>

<p>ie</p>

<p>1.</p>

<p>Extend the thread class, inherit from the thread class, its run() method and write the</p>

<p>functionality of the thread in the run() method.</p>

<p>Then create a new object in your class and call it start method, to run your thread.</p>

<p>Every Java thread is prioritized to help the operating system determine the order in which</p>

<p>to schedule threads</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>The other way of creating Threads is implementing the Runnable interface.</p>

<p>Implement the run() method, then create a new object and pass the runnable class to its</p>

<p>constructor.</p>

<p>TYPES OF EXCEPTIONS;</p>

<p>There are exception types ie checked and unchecked(&ldquo; runtime &rdquo;).</p>

<p>Main Diff is that checked exceptions are checked when compiled while unchecked</p>
<p>exceptions are checked at runtime.</p>
</body>
</html>
